# Thesis
## Algorithm-based development of an instrument to measure self-rated data literacy

This study aimed to develop a german, self-rated data literacy questionnaire tailored for non-specialized populations. Drawing on theoretical frameworks and previous operationalizations, the construct of data literacy was defined to include five facets: Comprehension, Evaluation, Integration, Communication, and Statistics. An initial pool of 71 items was refined through cognitive interviews and further narrowed to a final set of 20 items using an algorithm-based selection approach. Data were collected via a cross-sectional online survey (*N* = 616), and the measurement model was assessed using confirmatory factor analysis (CFA). Model fit indices indicated acceptable fit (CFI = .96, SRMR = .08, RMSEA = .05) of the initial model. A multi-group CFA indicated deterioration of fit (CFI = .92, SRMR = .087, RMSEA = .038), but confirmed scalar invariance across subsamples (random sample split), indicating some stability of the measurement model. The scale exhibited acceptable internal consistency (McDonald’s $\omega$ = .92) and suggested criterion validity in most aspects, with moderate to strong correlations observed with constructs such as information literacy and need for cognition. In addition to the measurement properties, limitations were noted in factor independence due to multicollinearity among some facets, as well as due to correlated residuals of the scales items. The questionnaire provides the first step towards a novel tool for assessing data literacy in laypeople and warrants further research into the construct's structure, applications and relevance.

The final Pdf Document: https://github.com/LeonieHagitte/Thesis/blob/main/MasterThesis_gh.pdf  
The final version is hosted at the gh-page: https://leoniehagitte.github.io/Thesis/  
You find the preregistration here: https://zenodo.org/records/11196495  
